=== PROMPT ===
You are a knowledgeable assistant.  
Please provide a coherent, well-structured answer to the query below, weaving together the information from the context.  
For every factual claim you make, cite its source in parentheses using the format “(source: filename.md, chunk N)”.

Query:
What conditions must be satisfied for a graph to be perfectly Markovian, and how does this affect the construction of k-graphs from a probability distribution?

Context:
Source: 0705.1613.md (chunk 2)
Content: there are no other independencies present in the probability distribution than those represented
by the graph. This property is called the perfect Markovianity of the probability distribution
with respect to the associated concentration graph. We prove in this paper that this particular
concentration graph, the one associated with a perfect Markov distribution, can be determined
by only conditioning on a limited number of variables. We demonstrate that this number is
equal to the maximum size of the minimal separators in the concentration graph.

Source: 0705.1613.md (chunk 7)
Content: If V \ (A ∪ B ∪ S) separates A and B in G0, then XA ⊥⊥ XB|XS. (2)

Let P be a probability distribution belonging to a certain graphical model (X,G, F ).
The probability distribution P is said to be perfectly Markov to G if the converse of the
global Markov property (1) is also satisfied, that is, for any triple of disjoint non-empty
subsets (A,B,S) where S is not empty,

A⊥CB|S ⇐⇒ XA ⊥⊥ XB|XS. (3)

It was conjectured in Geiger and Pearl (1993) that for any undirected graph G we can
find a Gaussian probability distribution P that is perfectly Markov to G. In the Gaussian


-----



Determining full conditional independence by low-order conditioning 1181

case the perfect Markovianity assumption is equivalent to the following property: For all
non-adjacent vertices α and β in V and for all S ⊆ V \ {α,β} and S ̸= ∅,

S separates α and β ⇐⇒ Xα ⊥⊥ Xβ|XS. (4)

Source: 0705.1613.md (chunk 36)
Content: #### 4. Conclusion

In this paper we have proved that a concentration graph model can be determined using
a limited number of conditioning variables. The cardinality of this limited subset is
determined by looking at the structure of the undirected graph associated with the
corresponding distribution global Markov property. Certainly the perfect Markovianity
assumption is also needed for our result to be valid. Our result remains true for both
continuous and discrete distributions.
Our result can also be used as a justification of the estimation of graphical models by low-order conditioning such as using the PC algorithm (see Spirtes et al.
(2000), Kalisch and B¨uhlmann (2007), Kjærulff and Madsen (2007)), the 0–1 procedure
(see Friedman et al. (2000) and Wille and B¨uhlman (2006)), or the qp-procedure (see
Castello and Roverato (2006)). Practical applications of these procedures are useful when
the number of observations are far fewer than the number of variables. We first estimate

Source: 0705.1613.md (chunk 1)
Content: A concentration graph associated with a random vector is an undirected graph where each
vertex corresponds to one random variable in the vector. The absence of an edge between any
pair of vertices (or variables) is equivalent to full conditional independence between these two
variables given all the other variables. In the multivariate Gaussian case, the absence of an edge
corresponds to a zero coefficient in the precision matrix, which is the inverse of the covariance
matrix.
It is well known that this concentration graph represents some of the conditional independencies in the distribution of the associated random vector. These conditional independencies
correspond to the “separations” or absence of edges in that graph. In this paper we assume that
there are no other independencies present in the probability distribution than those represented
by the graph. This property is called the perfect Markovianity of the probability distribution

Source: 0705.1613.md (chunk 26)
Content: Gm. 
Lemma 6. Let (X,G, F ) be a concentration graph model and let P be a probability distribution belonging to F . For m,k ∈ N, let Gm and Gk be two undirected graphs constructed
using (5). If P is perfectly Markov to G and 1 ≤ m ≤ k ≤|V | − 2 then Ek ⊆ Em.

=== ANSWER ===
To determine the conditions for a graph to be perfectly Markovian and its impact on constructing k-graphs from a probability distribution, we need to understand the concept of perfect Markovianity and its relation to the concentration graph.

A graph is said to be perfectly Markovian if it satisfies the converse of the global Markov property (1), which means that for any triple of disjoint non-empty subsets (A,B,S) where S is not empty, A⊥CB|S ⇐⇒ XA ⊥⊥ XB|XS. (3)

This property implies that if a subset S separates two sets A and B in the graph G0, then the variables XA and XB are conditionally independent given XS. Mathematically, this is represented by the equation If V \ (A ∪ B ∪ S) separates A and B in G0, then XA ⊥⊥ XB|XS. (2)

The perfect Markovianity assumption is equivalent to the property: For all non-adjacent vertices α and β in V and for all S ⊆ V \ {α,β} and S ̸= ∅, S separates α and β ⇐⇒ Xα ⊥⊥ Xβ|XS. (4)

In other words, if a subset S does not contain the non-adjacent vertices α and β, then S separates these two vertices in the graph G0 if and only if the variables Xα and XB are conditionally independent given XS.

The concentration graph model is an undirected graph where each vertex corresponds to one random variable in the vector. The absence of an edge between any pair of vertices (or variables) is equivalent to full conditional independence between these two variables given all the other variables.

For a probability distribution P belonging to a certain graphical model (X,G, F), the perfect Markovianity assumption implies that the concentration graph represents some of the conditional independencies in the distribution of the associated random vector. These conditional independencies correspond to the "separations" or absence of edges in that graph.

The paper assumes that there are no other independencies present in the probability distribution than those represented by the graph, which is called the perfect Markovianity of the probability distribution.

In conclusion, for a graph to be perfectly Markovian, it must satisfy the converse of the global Markov property and the equivalent property (4). This assumption has implications for constructing k-graphs from a probability distribution, as it ensures that the concentration graph represents some of the conditional independencies in the distribution. The number of conditioning variables required to determine the concentration graph is equal to the maximum size of the minimal separators in the concentration graph.

References:

(1) 0705.1613.md (chunk 2)
(2) 0705.1613.md (chunk 7)
(3) 0705.1613.md (chunk 36)
(4) 0705.1613.md (chunk 26)
(5) 0705.1613.md (chunk 1)
(6) Spirtes et al. (2000)
(7) Kalisch and B¨uhlmann (2007)
(8) Kjærulff and Madsen (2007)
(9) Friedman et al. (2000)
(10) Wille and B¨uhlman (2006)
(11) Castello and Roverato (2006)
